If I'm a construction worker working on
a skyrise or something, um, and I am not
wearing my helmet and I fall off a 60s
story building, I would be dead. But
let's assume that I get injured. You
>> probably be dead if you
>> I would probably be dead. All right.
>> Story building. Yeah. Okay.
>> Or one story.
>> Okay. But I'm not wearing my helmet even
though my employer says I should be
wearing a helmet and then I, you know,
file a claim. The absolute liability
rule basically says that you can't
divide blame between the company and the
worker. Is that right? So I'm instead of
being 90% at fault for my own injury
because I wasn't wearing a helmet and I
got a head injury, the company is now
100% at fault.
>> That's absolutely right. Uh and in other
states they do comparative negligence
and it's really driving up the cost of
insurance. So much so that insurers
don't even want to write insurance in
New York anymore.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
[music]
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway. So Tracy, everyone
is like very into affordability these
days and the cost of living and all that
stuff, but I think you know there's all
kinds of things you can do and whatever,
but it seems like one fundamental thing
which I is probably true
>> is whatever we're talking about whether
it's building uh infrastructure for
public transportation, whether it's
building offices, whether it's building
houses, like there's various costs
involved, but one is like just the cost
of construction. And if the cost of
construction is very high, it's hard to
imagine affordability improving much on
anything,
>> right? Does that seem fair?
>> I Yes, absolutely. I I can't really
debate that point, but it does seem like
construction is this like one area where
so many different things come into play.
So, you have the cost of basic
materials, which have gone up,
especially since the pandemic. You have
the cost of labor, which has also gone
up since the pandemic. You have the cost
of insurance, which has also gone up
since the pandemic. You have
regulations, which we've done many, many
episodes about the added costs from the
permitting process for various things.
It just seems like it's this bucket
where you can throw all these different
factors in and then get this I kind of
like reinforces itself and just makes it
even more expensive.
>> Yeah, totally. And then, you know, you
got you sort of hit it with the
insurance, but also just like cost of
financing, right? Because like as
interest rates go high, that
>> I forgot financing that, too. It's a big
bucket.
>> It's a big bucket. And like we know like
construction is an area across the
economy, not just in New York City, um
where we talked about it with
residential housing. There hasn't been a
lot of productivity growth, right? So
like
>> there's been like no productivity growth
according to at least one paper I read.
I think it was a Richmond Fed paper. I
will have to go back and check. But it's
a really unusual industry in the sense
that you haven't actually seen, you
know, we don't have robots building
houses yet.
>> We don't have uh robots building houses
yet. So, I don't know. You know, I think
we need to learn more. You know,
sometimes you see these viral
statistics. They're like, "Oh, the MTA
spent $60 million on building an
elevator or cost $3 million to build
>> 7 million installing those plastic fins
on the subway turn styles. I'm not even
sure that qualifies as construction, but
7 million
>> um or millions to build a bathroom,
which uh is not fun if like you have
little kids who, you know, all all kinds
of things." Anyway, we should do more
about why it costs a lot to build and uh
maybe whether there's something that can
be uh done about it.
>> Absolutely. Let's do it.
>> Well, I'm very excited to say we really
do have uh two perfect guests today.
We're going to be talking about the high
cost of construction, more
infrastructure and stuff like that uh in
New York City. We're going to be
speaking with Elizabeth Crowley. She's
the president and CEO of the Building
Trades Employers Association, also known
as BTEA, as well as Michael Capaso. He
is the president and CEO of CAC
Industries, Inc. So, uh, Elizabeth and
Michael, thank you so much for coming on
OddLots.
>> Thank you for having us.
>> Yeah, thank you Joe and Tracy. We are
grateful for the opportunity to talk
today. You know, uh, I represent o
over,200 contractors in the BTA who are
building our skyscrapers, our subways,
uh, building commercial buildings,
hospitals, schools, about 65 billion
dollars worth of work annually.
>> And, uh, what's, uh, tell us about CAC
industries. What's your background,
Michael?
>> CAC is a public works heavy highway
contractor based in New York City and
Queens. We work for the public agencies,
Port Authority of New York, Department
of Design and Construction, Department
of Environmental Protection, uh, MTA.
>> Amazing.
>> Battery Park City.
>> Did you see the Highline as well?
>> Yes.
>> That's amazing.
>> How do you know that?
>> I I do some research before I come
[laughter] on this podcast. I know a lot
of people don't think so, but you know,
a little bit. Um, okay. Let me ask the
first question. Uh, let's just get it
out of the way, but you know, your
organization represents unionized
workers, and I think your company is
also unionized workers. A lot of people
are going to hear high cost of
construction in NYC and immediately go
to the union factor. What is your
response to that?
>> Well, our uh members are employers, so
they're they're really businesses. We're
a business association, and our members
are employing over 100,000 workers. Um,
and uh, we're proud that we're union
contractors. You know, we're the good
guys and there are a lot of non-UN
contractors out there that are racing to
the bottom. We're paying for benefits
and wages and um, you know, that's just
part of the cost of construction.
Really, what we're looking at doing is
reforming costs that are more
controllable. You know, the the costs
the hidden costs that go into
construction, such as construction
insurance.
>> Definitely want to talk about con. I
mean this is we definitely want to talk
about construction insurance and all
this stuff but again just on this point
of like how much is quote hidden cost
versus how much is just labor. Maybe
Michael you could like sort of break
down or either one of you break down how
we should think about like in a given
project when people see these big
numbers how much should people think
about this is just the labor component
specifically versus measuring these
these other costs.
>> Yeah. I mean, I would say typically
labor ranges 30 to 35% of the total
construction cost,
>> but getting back to your original
statements about union and sometimes
people think that raises the cost of
construction.
>> I would actually take the
counterargument to that. All the public
works contracts in New York and the
utility contracts are subject to the
city or the state prevailing wage laws
which the unions rates are in line with
uh labor law 220 which are in the city
contract. Those are wages and benefits
you have to pay the employees. So it's
not the union wages that are uh costing
too much money. They're in line with all
the rules and regulations of the city
and state.
Um, I think when we think about union
wages and why maybe there's this
misconception, yes, compared to people
that are not paying union wages, these
people are paying good, honest wages and
benefits for the work they put in during
the day. There are people who cut
corners who don't pay that fair market
rate, which is where that kind of
concept comes from.
>> And look, there is a lot of cost to the
delays. And when we Yeah. When we look
at our government leaders now, we have a
new mayor in the city of New York who uh
believes that we should pay baristas $40
an hour. So when Mike talks about the
cost of union labor, it's not much more
an hourly rate. And these are inherently
dangerous jobs. Um but we have a mayor
that wants to build more abundantly. Uh
wants to cut the time it takes to build.
So the land use process from two years
down to under six months and we support
that. Uh and the stars are aligning also
with the governor. You know she has an
ambitious plan to build a new uh subway
or railway from Brooklyn to Queens. We
haven't built like that in like over a
hundred years. Um she's uh in her budget
going after environmental review. I mean
environmental review should only take a
few months. You can see that process
sometimes take well over a few years,
some uh bad cases five years. And so
what uh we're doing here um a as an
industry leader at the BTA, we're
looking to reform insurance costs so
that we can not only build more
abundantly uh build faster, but bring
down the cost. And this is a substantial
cost. We found out from a recent report
that nearly 10% of construction costs
are wasted uh in New York as opposed to
any other state. Even expensive states
like California, the the cost of
insurance is only about 2% for the total
project cost
>> where we're spending upwards of 10 12%.
>> Definitely want to talk about insurance,
but you said something interesting there
that just reminded me. You said delays
add to the cost pressure.
>> This might be a dumb question, but why
is that? Because I think back to like my
own home construction projects. If I
have a contractor and he's, you know, he
says this is going to take six weeks,
but then he gets caught up on another
project and it ends up taking eight
weeks, the the cost usually doesn't go
up. It's just frustrating for me because
I have to live in a construction site.
Also, I want to say my contractor knows
I have a podcast. He's a very good
contractor. Delays [laughter]
rarely happen. So, thank you very much.
But why would that cause additional um
expenses? Well, just sheer time. I mean,
what can be controllable? Certainly the
land use process. Uh before representing
the BTA, I was a New York City council
member, so I served for nine years. And
a quick case by the time it goes through
the local community board, the burough
president's office, and then comes to
the council with the best lobbyists
happens within two years. And so, uh, if
the mayor could get that, uh, narrowed
down and the council speaker is also
pledging to reduce the time to a window
of less than 6 months, that's 25% of,
uh, the average. And so that's
significant time saved. That's something
that we should be able to control. And
if our government leaders want to
control it, that's real reform.
>> Can you actually, you know what, we talk
like this is I'm not surprised at all to
hear about like delays, particularly
environmental review. people like talk
about this.
>> Let's actually talk about it a little
bit more granularly. Like so like you
get like some project that you want to
do. I don't know maybe something with a
highway or something like that and you
have some time frame or some window that
you think like you could get this done
and then we always hear oh delays right
what is what are what are what what
drives the delays who intervenes and
what are the processes by which like
these calendars get very extended
>> there could be design errors or
omissions in the uh in the bid
documents. Okay.
>> So, when you actually go out to commence
construction and do your preliminary
work, the drawings don't match up with
actual field conditions, which then
result in changes to the contract. And
that process can be very lengthy.
>> So, now you have to document the
changes.
>> You then as a contractor with one of the
public agencies need to negotiate those
changes, then get it approved. depending
on what the agency is. It could be with
the controllers's office in the city of
New York or if it's at the MTA with the
board or whoever approves it at the MTA.
And all those steps take time while
those delays are being incurred.
Contractors are then experiencing
indirect overhead costs that are
assigned to the project while no
productive work.
>> Explain that. What are these indirect
overhead costs? project managers,
project supervision,
uh safety directors, quality assurance
personnel,
uh all sorts of
>> so their their salaries and their fees
continue to run.
>> You can't reassign them to another
project while they're waiting.
>> Correct. They're assigned to a project.
You don't know when those processes will
come to an end. So, you know, it it
could go very expeditiously. It could be
delayed longer depending on how complex
the changes are. So that project staff
sits there in theory underutilized
and then as is our contractual right we
will file a claim with that contracting
agency for those additional costs
coupled with that and I don't know how
these costs are calculated the agency
internally also has those same costs for
the people on those projects whether
in-house staff or through thirdparty
consultants a combination of the two. So
those costs all get compounded while
these changes happen.
>> I mean, one of the last projects I
funded as a council member was to pay
for a a turf uh in a park like just like
a a running athletic field, a
replacement, simple replacement. It was
funded fully in the budget. I left the
council in 2017. Uh they only cut the
ribbon on that project being fully
completed uh just in 2024.
>> So what happened in those seven years?
What are they studying? Like you buy the
turf, you stick it on the ground.
>> How would you describe [laughter] what
happened? The
>> parks department said it was going to be
a $4 million field replacement. Then uh
when they, you know, the contractor came
out to the site, there was a lot of
surface repair underneath that that
needed to happen. Uh underlying uh you
know, just you know, uneven surface or
something like that. They sent it back.
It had to go back before design review
council. I mean, by the time it it
really it's something so small and so
simple that shouldn't even cost as much
as it does gets delayed for far too
long. And we need real reform in city
government. I believe uh government
leaders are, you know, are finally
addressing this as an impediment to
building uh abundantly. Really?
>> Yeah. So, this just reminded me, this is
something else I want to ask, but when
you mentioned site reviews, is there
something unique or sort of inherent
about the way New York City is laid out
and built and its geography that also
makes it more expensive? I'm I'm
thinking like in Manhattan, obviously,
we have crowded buildings. Is some of
Manhattan on reclaimed land? I can't
remember now.
>> Well, Battery Park City is all reclaimed
land.
>> There we go. Reclaimed land. And it's
mostly an island with few ins and outs,
right? So, I imagine there are some
restrictions on how much material you
can actually get into the city. Does
just the the physicality of the city
make it more expensive?
>> Yeah. All that's built into the contract
cost. So, when we're getting vendor
quotes for different types of materials
that will go into a construction
project,
most of the manufacturing base is not
within the five burrows, right? So, it's
coming either from upstate out on Long
Island, New Jersey, maybe Pennsylvania,
southern New Jersey. you have the cost
of that transportation into the five
burrows,
right? So this if if you're a vendor
who's manufacturing somewhere in central
Jersey, well, you probably can make
multiple deliveries within the state of
New Jersey where maybe that same freight
carrier can only make one delivery a day
into the five burrows.
>> Yeah, that may I mean I make sense. By
the way, there's a great um Ken Burns's
brother uh whose name I'm forgetting. He
made a great documentary about New York
and there's a whole one it's like a 10
hour or 11 hour documentary and there's
a whole section on the speed with which
steel got from the Bethlehem steel mill
to build um one of the Chrysler building
or something like that. It's just an
unbelievable logistics. I imagine it
would be a little bit slower today. All
right. Can we let's get to insurance and
all of that stuff. You even brought us a
nice reporting material, scaffold law,
economic impact, which evidently, even
though on the cover of the report has a
picture of a scaffold, is not about
scaffolds.
>> Not just about scaffold,
>> not about scaffolds per se.
>> Per se,
>> but why what is the scaffold law and why
is this like an important priority of
yours? Um well look if uh a worker was
to fall off the scaffold then the
scaffold law would apply and it's to any
height related injury a New York
contractor New York City contractor is
held 100% liable and in 49 other states
it's comparable negligence. And so what
we all found through that economic
impact study was that every hund00
million that is wasted on frivolous
claims uh when you look at reinvesting
that into the economy there's $140
million output and that it amounts to
about $55 million in wages and over 600
jobs. And we look at big projects like
the president wants to build uh Penn
Station that's estimated to be $7
billion in cost. If we were to put
comparative negligence on that project,
we could save over $500 million. That's
half a billion dollars.
>> So, just so we understand the difference
between comparative negligence and
absolute liability. So, if I'm a
construction worker working on a skyrise
or something, um, and I am not wearing
my helmet and I fall off a 60story
building, I would be dead. But let's
assume that I get injured.
>> You' probably be dead if
>> I would probably be dead. All right.
60story building. Yeah. Okay.
>> Or one story. Okay. but I'm not wearing
my helmet even though my employer says I
should be wearing a helmet and then I,
you know, file a claim. The absolute
liability
rule basically says that you can't
divide blame between the company and the
worker. Is that right? So I'm instead of
being 90% at fault for my own injury
because I wasn't wearing a helmet and I
got a head injury, the company is now
100% at fault.
>> That's absolutely right.
uh and in other states they do
comparative negligence and it's really
driving up the cost of insurance. So
much so that insurers don't even want to
write insurance in New York anymore.
Contractors like my
>> the market's limited.
>> Yeah. Tell us about the insurance market
for you because this is a good theme for
us.
>> So I mean there's zero purchasing power.
Uh contractors make a significant
investment
in safety. There's I I promise you
there's nothing more important to the
contracting community than for every
employee to go home safe to their
family, loved ones, or whoever that may
be at the end of the day. I know
everybody cares about that. Um but when
we go to renew our insurance every year
and the large insurance carriers look at
what this this market for them is
considered one of the or the least
favorable market to write insurance. So
much so that carriers don't even want to
write insurance in this market anymore.
And if they do, deductibles are really
high. Uh rates are really high. So on a
on a percentage base of revenue, we're
talking about, you know, five, six, 10x
other states with much higher
deductibles. So now contractors carry
the cost of those deductible payouts in
their bids, which goes into these public
work bid
>> numbers. So that's where you
exponentially see the higher cost of
construction. But
>> it actually take it a step further. All
the subcontractors and vendors that are
going to be working on our jobs also
have the same problem.
>> And typically the subcontractors are
smaller contractors by either volume or
revenue or employees. So they're
typically paying a higher premium on a
percentage basis. So those numbers are
also baked into our contract pricing to
the owners.
>> Yeah. our report really when we say uh
contractors in New York are paying 10%
of total construction costs to insurance
that's 500% more than other states where
in other states it's only about 2% and
then as Michael mentioned the
subcontractor they get hit the worst on
average if you're a concrete uh
subcontractor or a steel painting
contractor you're paying 15 to 20% of
your total volume of work and it's
unsustainable
>> so New York is the only city or only
state city state state that still has
this law in place. Is that right?
>> Yes.
>> What happened in other states when we
saw it go away?
>> So, the last state to reform the
so-called staff scaffold law, absolute
liability standard was Illinois in 1995.
So, uh this is 140y old law. It's
antiquated. It's broken policy. Even
both the Democrats and the Republicans,
when you speak to them one-on-one, they
know this is fail policy. Uh and the
interesting thing, Illinois, their
safety, uh the number of fatalities
declined after they put a comparative
negligence model in. So those that say
it's a you know, you have some uh trial
lawyers, then they really it is a cash
count for the trial bar. I mean,
>> that was going to be my next question.
So, if everyone agrees that this is an
antiquated law, who's actually standing
in the way?
>> We're definitely going to get an email
after this episode and they're like,
"Your guests were totally biased." It's
going to be from some lawyer and they're
like, "We want to come on and do a
follow-up." Maybe we will. Um, but um
but this raised the question, okay, the
law has been around since for over a
hundred years,
>> so why now? I mean, like I can
understand that that might raise Yes.
Okay, New York is going to be a higher
cost state. That doesn't explain the
surge per se. Has something changed in
the last 5, 10, 20 years? I mean, New
York used to do a lot more building or
used to build a lot. Has something
changed such that the law has more teeth
or bites more than it did? I mean,
again, you talk about the disappearance
of certain insurance carriers, the law
existed 50 years ago, right?
>> When I was first started my business,
Yeah. a little over 30 years ago,
>> you know, insurance was an add-on on on
the bid where you didn't really focus
about it. we're about 1 2% of the
contract price. And that held true maybe
up until even 10 years ago. And in the
last 10 years, we've seen a significant
rise in the cost of insurance. And I
think it directly correlates with
frequency
of claims, third-party claims, uh
payouts of those claims, and how either
a judge or jury awards uh damages in
those cases. Um there's been well
doumented cases of staged construction
accidents on sites.
>> What Michael said is absolutely true. In
New York for scaffold laws, uh the
bodily injury claim settlements for
scaffold law six and a half times the
average of other claim settlements. The
sheer volume has
been increased by 10fold. But we're
talking in 15 years. And that's why
these insurers are leaving. You know,
why now? Why do we think we have a real
opportunity? Not just because we have
this economic impact uh uh report that
shows us exactly how much we're spending
because government leaders are finally
talking about the fraud and abuse that's
happening. You know, our governor and
her state of the state last month uh
called on insurance reform for the
automobile industry. Now, we half of the
consumers in the state are car owners,
right? They're driving. they they could
relate to us paying so much more, but
we're paying 50% more in car insurance
compared to every other state, but our
contractors are paying 500% more. And
the governor had touched upon fraud and
abuse, just like Mike said. Um the
governor says we need to address that.
We need to lower litigation costs. And
mind you, that these are auto insurance
claims are much much less than the
scaffold law claims. And we need to fix
this. We need reform. So this is a step
in the right direction. And we're really
focused on reform in Washington right
now. There's movement there. There's a
lot of support on this big uh federal
infrastructure package that's a part of
a surface reauthorization transit uh
bill that gets reauthorized every 5
years. It pays for big projects like a
Second Avenue subway or major roads and
highways, bridges, and uh it's a
mustpass bill. And we think that we'll
see reform there first. and we're very
hopeful that reform will come uh soon in
Albany.
>> How would you actually go about reducing
litigation costs? Because my assumption
is as long as you're doing like a jury
process, it's going to be pretty
expensive unless you go to something
like arbitration.
>> Yeah. Well, you know, uh the uh
litigated costs, one would say it goes
to jury, but all of these insurance
companies right now are just afraid to
get that far in New York State.
>> So, they settle pretty quickly. One
insurance company, Traesman Insurance,
they filed five different RICO cases in
recent years, probably I've heard them
say that they invested over $16 million
to do personal investigations to stop
fraud and abuse.
>> Wow.
>> And they they say that because they were
able to get so many claims dropped by
showing the Ford that there were bad
actors, uh they saved over $2 billion
and and the numbers keep growing. and
and one law firm, Subnosit, that had
like three 300 different cases dropped
apparently uh closed their doors last
month. So, it shouldn't get to that
where insurance companies have to do the
reform. This is bad public policy and we
need our leaders in Washington and
Albany to do reform. Now,
>> it's I mean, I think it's well
documented. It's all public information
of just one building or a couple
buildings where multiple claimants from
the same building with the same law firm
utilizing the same medical practices
filing these lawsuits.
>> Yeah. And some of the doctors are losing
their licenses and uh they're barred
from workers comp cases. And so that is
reassuring to see action happen. And
we've reaching a critical mass at this
point. So I think that's why uh now
we're hopeful for reform.
>> Michael, can you talk a little bit more
about today versus mid90s, you get a you
get a you win a bid with the city or
whatever you have a project. Talk a
little bit more about the process of
like you mentioned back then insurance
was an add-on. Okay, it was one or two%
now it's 10%. But setting aside the
price going out and finding which
carrier will take that. Can you just
talk about what life was like, I don't
know, again, 30 years ago versus today
in terms of going out into the market
for finding that insurance, available
options, negotiations, and so forth.
>> Yeah, I mean, it was much easier and
much more simple 20, 30 years ago than
it is today.
>> All right. What'd you do?
>> You talk to your insurance broker. They
would come back with three or four
quotes, all roughly the same. Who did
you feel comfortable with? You would do
your annual renewals. There would be
incremental
to cost of living, inflationary
adjustments to your annual rate. You
signed on again for another year. Now
it's a much more detailed, thorough
process, thorough review. How much you
going to raise your deductibles
where back then deductibles might have
been $25,000. I mean, I think we're at
750 500 or 750,000 now per occurrence. I
mean, significant significant changes
where now the insurance company will
dictate when you're going through your
quotes, if you don't raise your
deductible, we won't even write your
insurance
>> where that didn't happen back then. So,
there was much more purchasing power in
the contracting community 20, 30 years
ago in the marketplace than there is
today.
>> Yeah, this is what I wanted to ask. So,
if the scaffolding law goes away, are
you confident that new insurance actors
would actually come into the market?
because it feels like part of the
problem here is a lot of people have
exited so you have limited insurers to
actually choose from which means they
now have all the pricing power.
>> Yeah, I think the free market will work
itself. It's a competitive market right
now for the limited that do do business
in New York. I was just on the phone
earlier today with Zoric, which is a
worldwide insurer, and uh they stopped
insuring small contractors, and they'll
only do big wrap-up projects. In New
York State, our Department of Financial
Services uh regulates the companies to
make sure that they can't charge too
much or too little. And again, it's the
market. Uh if as long as they can prove
they can make money here in New York,
they'll come back. It just dawned on me,
you know, one other thing to consider
which sometimes is good for the local
contracting community.
>> Yeah.
>> But also not necessarily good for the
overall city of New York. There are
contractors based in other states that
won't work here because their insurance
companies will exclude
>> their policy from working in New York
and then they would have to buy jobsp
specific or sightsp specific policies
which are also very uncompetitive rates.
So it's easier for them just to stay out
of the marketplace that then in theory
may drive down competition right from a
lowcost bid analysis. I think and
interesting, you know, to bring it back
to what the governor has, uh, taken on
in her state of the state or in her
budget, uh, auto insurance, you know, we
mentioned the trial lawyers and how this
is really a catch cow for them, but uh,
you know, they like to paint the
insurance companies as the bad actors,
but we look in places like uh, Florida,
for example, they had a similar no fault
auto insurance policy like New York
currently has, and uh, they changed the
policies there and they've given rate
payers uh double-digit uh refunds. Uh so
there is a situation, a scenario where
we could see the same for our
contractors if real reform happens here
in New York.
>> Just to be clear, does the high cost of
insurance also apply to projects where
heights presumably don't come into it
very much. So you know, if you're
building a new subway tunnel or
something like that, I assume there
there's probably some scaffolding
involved, but like maybe you're not
falling too much. You could be standing
on a ladder in a sewer trench, six
inches up on the ladder with the ladder
secured in the bottom of the hole tied
up all in conformance with OSHA
regulations. And if the employee falls 6
in
>> Mhm.
>> to the ground,
which typically we all think we would be
okay falling 6 in, but then some injury
arises months later and ends up in a
lawyer's desk and the contractor is then
sued, there'll be some sort of payout
and that [clears throat] would fall
under the scaffold law. So even though
you're not up on the heights of a
building, not building a superructure,
that law still applies. So, I find it
this argument to be very compelling and
uh the the uh high cost of insurance on
a per project basis in New York City
versus every other state that seems like
an issue with unquestionably. All that
being said, some of the numbers you read
about construction processes, okay,
let's say we take only 30% for labor or
labor is 30% of the job and then let's
say insurance is 10% of the job. So, we
have this other part and when I, you
know, when you read about the cost of an
elevator in a subway,
it seems like even if we like knocked
off a lot of it for insurance and labor,
whatever, it still seems crazy expensive
in New York. So, can we just talk about
like are these numbers real? Like when
we see like, oh, it cost $60 million to
build an elevator somewhere. Is that
fake? Is that is that real or is that
clickbait? What's going on there? I
mean, I don't know where it costs 60
million to to build an elevator. But
look, remember there are subsurface
conditions in New York that you have to
deal with, like relocating utilities and
gas mains and steam mains and electric
that all may go into the cost of that
elevator, but it's really not the direct
cost of the elevator. So, like when the
MTA goes and puts a new elevator in on a
corner,
>> Yeah.
>> Yes. Maybe the cost of that elevator
project sounds enormous and it is for
the elevator project, but not all of it
is directly tied to the elevator. It's
clearing a lane,
>> but other cities have this too, right?
Like I mean, yeah, absolutely. It's not
all there's going to be real estate
acquisition costs and all the issues of
materials and everything, but I get the
impression that like building an
elevator in New York City, like should
taxpayers be happy with like the
numbers? They seem very high and they
seem out of proportion with what we see
in other cities.
>> Yeah. I don't know the comparative data.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah, we are most expensive to build in
comparison to other cities like San
Francisco. Yeah.
>> Uh but it's still very expensive to
build there, too.
>> Sure. So, what are we paying for? Like
what what are these numbers? I mean,
again, let's go back to the turf
example. $4 million for like turf on
let's
>> and you did and I laughed before when
you mentioned the the skyscraper the
Chrysler building and the Bethlehem
steel and how that was probably put
together in less than a year the Empire
State Building and today we're building
mega towers that are taking three four
years and while they're important
projects and they're very expensive
projects uh we were able to do it uh in
such a shorter time frame back then of
course you save money when you reduce
the time back to that uh uh track. It
was in Juniper Park. And it's funny that
you mentioned that, but actually I
realized after you spoke about Battery
Park and how um you know that was water
before we uh expanded
that was a swamp land once in in in
Queens, that particular park. And so
those are the constraints that we don't
think about when we're building in New
York. It's so hard to find schools, you
know, places to build schools. I
remember as a council member just having
the most overcrowded school district and
so many sites were contaminated and we
couldn't find a good site. You know,
it's just these difficult things that
happen in such a dense city and it's
part of the reason it's so expensive to
build here. Does anyone have any good
examples of building like efficiently at
not so much cost relatively in New York
City or New York State speak uh but
still to a high standard like an example
of a project that was done really well?
Michael surely you should be naming some
of your own.
>> Yeah. No, I mean we we don't have unless
there are major design
flaws or errors. I feel like almost all
of our projects do go extremely well,
right? It's a competitive marketplace.
We're the low bidder.
>> Mh.
>> Right. Typically, when you get the job,
which means we're the cheapest price,
the lowest responsible bidder. And more
often than not, we don't have these
major, you know, overruns or changes.
um they seem to go fairly well
>> and um Michael introduced himself as the
president of the company as but me and
Michael worked together on the mayor's
task force for capital reform and we
went up to Albany as part of the reforms
two years ago and pushed for progressive
design bills or different ways uh of
building projects uh that New York
didn't use and other states used and
that actually decreased the timeline and
uh you were able to build uh for less by
using these delivery methods. And I
think that Shirley Chisum Park, they
just Mayor Mom Dami cut the ribbon, but
DDC is pointing to that project as
coming in under budget and um you know,
and in in a shorter amount of time that
was estimated that it would take to
build. So there are ways we could work
together, putting our minds together uh
to bring about real reform.
>> I I think one area that we didn't touch
on, which I think is important, I know
you probably know the statistics, right?
If you if you look at the
counterargument like if you said the
trial lawyers
>> sure
>> to to what's driving these insurance
costs,
>> you would think if these stricter rules
and laws are in place, it would make
everything much safer or safer for the
worker or less injuries. And do you want
to touch on that?
>> I mean, look, there's nothing more
important than safety. That's a
cornerstone of the work that our
contractors do. um you know they want
their workers to go home as safe as they
were when they came to work that day.
We're you know even uh focusing on
culture on the job site and total well
wellness uh you know that's that's
important. Um so we need to continue to
be forward thinking and
>> but the data the data set the results in
New York are equal
to other states. Oh, on in terms of our
rate of fatalities. In fact, uh New York
has a higher rate of fatalities despite
this law in comparison to state like New
Jersey or the average in the country.
You know, when we have nearly 12
injuries, fatalities per 100,000
workers, whereas the national average is
under 10. And so we're 20% higher in New
York despite having such a strict
liability on contractors.
>> Can we talk a little bit about current
conditions? So one of the things that we
heard a lot in like 2021, 2022, 23, this
like intense scarcity of skilled
tradesmen uh in various things,
electrical, etc. How is that is that
still a big is that a big issue still a
major constraint right now? Finding
available labor?
>> I I think an aging workforce at least I
mean without me having any demographic
data just like visual context and
>> we do have an aging workforce. I don't
think the younger generations are so
inclined to either go to a vocational
school or some type of trade school. I
would sit here and I I would tell anyone
I think it it would be a great industry
with the disruption going on in the
world right now.
>> Yeah. uh with you know the advent of AI
and and all these jobs
>> like for you like right now is this like
when you think of the various headaches
that you have in your life is keeping a
sort of steady the available flow of
labor that knows how to build things
like one of the things that keeps you up
at night.
>> Yeah. I mean available flow of labor is
one of the things that's kept me up at
night since I started my business.
>> Okay.
>> We converted to a 100% employee owned
company a couple of years ago. So much
so that I included the trades people.
also the collectively bargained
employees through the different unions
in the city are part of that ESOP.
>> That's very unusual and I applaud
Michael and his team for doing that. Um
but when it look when we think about uh
workforce needs uh many of our
contractors that are doing the
infrastructure work like Michael are
experiencing uh difficulties and often
take talent from one another. So ESOP is
gonna stop that for sure. But uh when
you look at the commercial uh buildings
that are going up, which is more of a
private market uh or residential, that
is not happening. And we really didn't
have a chance to talk much about
affordable housing, but uh that any of
that building is much more likely to be
non-union today, which is a real shame
because a lot of times those workers are
not getting paid on the books. uh more
likely 80% of the injuries that happen
on job sites are happening on non-union
job sites. So we really want to prevent
that and help promote uh union
employment as much as possible.
>> Michael, you mentioned AI. So now I have
to ask you know we we dug in a little
bit into construction productivity at
the beginning of this conversation and
you know I think construction is largely
done now as it was probably like 20 or
30 years ago and there have been some
technological advances like the nail gun
but beyond that we don't have actual
robots that are like putting shingles on
our houses and things like that but how
confident are you that it's going to
actually stay that way forever cuz I
mean LLM's chat that GPT kind of
>> I like how you're looking at me like I'm
going to like vibe code I'm going to
vibe code a robot
>> running Joe it's all [clears throat]
Joe's fault but it came out of nowhere
for white collar workers could it come
out of nowhere for uh blue collar
>> I I think so and look I don't think it's
going to replace the workforce I
actually was at a construction
conference um a couple weeks ago and my
biggest takeaway is AI isn't replacing
employees but employees who use AI will
replace the employees who aren't Do you
see that like like are there in your
firm or are you getting value from it?
Is anyone doing anything with like tech
or anything? Is anyone using it for
drawing?
>> We had our um off-site strategy session
last week and one of our quarterly
priorities.
>> Yeah.
>> Is all around implementing artificial
intelligence in our processes and
workflows.
>> So really how can we get information
sooner?
>> Yeah. So instead of relying on maybe
these incumbent software models, taking
the data we have and you using AI to
give us analysis of that data much
quicker.
>> So not [clears throat] so much the
physical process of like putting up
drywall, but the planning and
>> Well, look, that's coming. I mean, I
have friends who have robots that can
tie rebars now with wire,
>> right? They've invested in these
companies. I'm I'm not utilizing those
robots yet, but they're out there.
Caterpillar has technology, the the
heavy equipment manufacturer where
someone can sit, let's call it like we
grew up with a video game like it looks
like a pole position. I don't know if if
I'm dating myself
>> and you can operate four different
machines, not at the same time, but from
one TV screen, four actual Caterpillar
machines at four different locations
just sitting in like what I would call
an arcade machine.
>> Wow.
>> With no operator in the seat.
>> Yeah. Interestingly enough, you know, I
mentioned Zoric earlier. Zoric insurance
will only uh ensure a project in New
York if there are cameras watching. Now,
they use AI after a day's work to study
any movement that was dangerous. So,
it's not just like
>> people, you know, believe it's for
surveillance to stop fraud and abuse
from happening, but it's really to
correct workers to and reduce risk. and
they've seen that their uh incidents
have gone down significantly and uh
their job sites are much more safer.
>> I'm part of a Tri Venture uh group doing
the East Coast Resiliency Project on the
Lower East Side. It's 1.3
[clears throat]
>> billion dollar project and we're
utilizing that exact system. The cameras
are located on machines on poles and the
data gets downloaded every night
analyzed by AI. So not only do we get
like near misses or data, but we also
use it for training the workforce. So
the videos that it captures
>> to make the job site safer.
>> Yeah.
>> What about um again just talking about
current conditions? What about materials
cost? So we know that the cost of
everything surged a lot you know
immediately in the wake of the pandemic.
Um you getting any relief? Have the pace
of price increases gone uh slowed at
all? Are there any parts? We've talked
about like transformers, like various
key electrical parts that you can't get
easily at any price. What are you seeing
right now on just acquisition of
materials?
>> Yeah, I have not seen prices come down.
>> Okay.
>> You know, it's no different when there
was like a fuel search charge, right? If
that the oil market spiked and every
vendor would put a fuel search charge on
deliveries, somehow those fuel search
charges never go away. What about other
like just other raw materials like other
things that are in like scarcity that
you like have a difficult time finding
at all at any price
>> right now? No. I think we're pretty much
getting everything we need. I know COVID
and coming out of CO there was big
issues.
>> When you walk into a building like the
Bloomberg offices, do you look around
and you think like what a marvel of
structural engineering or do you think I
wonder what the insurance costs are?
>> No, I think I should have done something
different in my career. [laughter]
You know, one one last thing that you
mentioned and I've read people who like
talk about like, you know, abundance,
etc. They talk about how a lot of like
public projects there's a big consultant
element that many aspects of it have
been outsourced from the public sector
that these third parties and that that
drives up. You mentioned consultants.
Does that does that resonate with you in
terms of where you see potential cost
bloat and so forth? Yeah, I mean I I
don't know the value of the consultant
contracts, but I can tell you based on
my experience.
>> We used to work on a lot more contracts
that were run in-house by the agencies.
>> And now you see a lot of third-party
uh like resident engineer and inspection
services and other tests that used to be
performed in-house that are now
performed by third party consultants.
>> And often they're called owner's reps.
and we'll get complaints from our
contractors that owners reps are
delaying the project so they continue to
get paid for the project. And that's uh
something where we're interested in
seeing some reform too. Um I' I've heard
of that on more than one type of
project. It could, you know, it could be
a school being built or uh a bridge
being painted.
>> Michael and Elizabeth, thank you so much
for uh coming on Oddlo. That was a lot
of fun.
>> Yeah. Thank Thanks for having us.
>> That was great. Thank you so much.
>> Thank you for having us. We appreciate
it. That was super interesting.
>> That was great, Tracy. That was a fun
conversation. I like it felt like a
really we learned about the city in some
way. You know what I was saying?
>> I learned a lot about absolute
liability.
>> Yeah, absolute liability.
>> That was interesting. Look, I also think
part of this I mean I the point about
delays is very striking to me because
again that that would seem to be an
issue where you're still paying people
to build something but building it is
taking 10 years instead of 5 years.
>> That's huge. Especially at a time when
interest rates are high because then
they compound extra. Yeah.
>> Right. And also it seems like there's a
potential problem of incentives here,
right? Like if I am a consultant working
on a project and I am still getting paid
but the project's not actually going and
I can spend a lot of time, I don't know,
pointing out like individual issues and
potentially delaying stuff like that's
an incentive problem.
>> Yeah. No, absolutely. Um, I guess I
would say I find the point about
insurance to be compelling and the point
about like if 49 other states have
gotten rid of these laws and they're not
actually even making New York a safer
workplace. I mean, it would be one
thing, I guess, if like New York had
like half the accident rate as the rest
of the country. And then you say, okay,
well, look, like you can point to a law
like this and say this is clearly making
causing everyone to take safety more
seriously. If you can't point to that,
if every other estate has gotten rid of
it, I mean, I don't have any opinion,
but and again, I'm sure we're going to
hear from lawyers.
>> We're about to get make an enemy out of
the trial bar, too.
>> Yeah, there's we're going to get emails
from lawyers saying we want to do a a
rebuttal episode, but I my gut is that
there's probably some definitely
something to that.
>> Well, the other thing I was thinking
about on the insurance point is, you
know, I have this pet theory that like
insurers basically run the world. Yeah.
I mean, they control a lot of money.
They set like not just safety standards
but social standards for a lot of
things. It's really interesting hearing
about using AI to monitor um yeah
security camera footage like for health
and safety because I can imagine you
know if that helps the insurers I can
imagine them asking that to become
standard practice everywhere. It's super
interesting to think like, okay, yeah,
you want to have cameras because if
there's an accident, then you could go
back and review the footage, but this
idea that like, oh, you could like see
if there was a near miss or something
like that and the AI can detect it
directly potentially. That's
interesting. And then, of course,
there's going to be all these questions
about surveillance and whether people
like that. But this is um
>> uh this is going to be uh it's going to
be a big topic. Yeah.
>> And it's it's going to come on very
fast.
>> I know I keep saying this, but we really
should do more on insurance. We'll
figure out.
>> We're starting to do more. You know,
like if we keep saying it like we are,
you know.
>> No. [laughter]
>> Yes. But even more.
>> But even more. I agree. I agree.
>> Shall we leave it there?
>> Yeah. Let's leave it there.
>> Okay. This has been another episode of
the All Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Armen Dashel
Bennett at Dashbot and Kale Brooks at
Kaleb Brooks.
>> And if you want more OddLots content,
then you can check out our daily
newsletter. Sometimes we write about
insurers. You can find that at
bloomberg.com/odlotss.
>> And you can chat about all these topics
247 in our Discord, discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
[music]